Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms

Whereas Canada is founded upon principles that recognize the supremacy of God and the rule of law:

Guarantee of Rights and Freedoms

1. The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees
the rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits
prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic
society.

Fundamental Freedoms

2. Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms: (a) freedom
of conscience and religion; (b) freedom of thought, belief, opinion and
expression, including freedom of the press and other media of communication;
(c) freedom of peaceful assembly; and (d) freedom of association.

Democratic Rights

3. Every citizen of Canada has the right to vote in an election of
members of the House of Commons or of a legislative assembly and to be
qualified for membership therein. 
4.(1) No House of Commons and no legislative assembly shall continue for 
longer than five years from the date fixed for the return of the writs at a 
general election of its members. (2) In time of real or apprehended war, 
invasion or insurrection, a House of Commons may be continued by Parliament 
and a legislative assembly may be continued by the legislature beyond five years 
if such continuation is not opposed by the votes of more than one-third of the 
members of the House of Commons or the legislative assembly, as the case may be. 
5. There shall be a sitting of Parliament and of each legislature at least once 
every twelve months.

Mobility Rights

6.(1) Every citizen of Canada has the right to enter, remain in and
leave Canada. (2) Every citizen of Canada and every person who has the status
of a permanent resident of Canada has the right (a) to move to and take up
residence in any province; and (b) to pursue the gaining of a livelihood in
any province. (3) The rights specified in subsection (2) are subject to (a)
any laws or practices of general application in force in a province other than
those that discriminate among persons primarily on the basis of province
of present or previous residence; and (b) any laws providing for reasonable
residency requirements as a qualification for the receipt of publicly provided
social services. (4) Subsections (2) and (3) do not preclude any law, program
or activity that has as its object the amelioration in a province of conditions of
individuals in that province who are socially or economically disadvantaged
if the rate of employment in that province is below the rate of employment in
Canada.

Legal Rights

7. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and
the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles
of fundamental justice. 
8. Everyone has the right to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure. 
9. Everyone has the right not to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned. 
10. Everyone has the right on arrest or detention (a) to be informed promptly
of the reasons therefor; (b) to retain and instruct counsel without delay and 
to be informed of that right; and (c) to have the validity of the detention 
determined by way of habeas corpus and to be released if the detention is not lawful. 
11. Any person charged with an offence has the right (a) to be informed without 
unreasonable delay of the specific offence; (b) to be tried within a reasonable 
time; (c) not to be compelled to be a witness in proceedings against that person 
in respect of the offence; (d) to be presumed innocent until proven guilty according 
to law in a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal; 
(e) not to be denied reasonable bail without just cause; (f) except in the case 
of an offence under military law tried before a military tribunal, to the benefit 
of trial by jury where the maximum punishment for the offence is imprisonment for five
years or a more severe punishment; (g) not to be found guilty on account of
any act or omission unless, at the time of the act or omission, it constituted
an offence under Canadian or international law or was criminal according to
the general principles of law recognized by the community of nations; (h) if
finally acquitted of the offence, not to be tried for it again and, if finally found
guilty and punished for the offence, not to be tried or punished for it again;
and (i) if found guilty of the offence and if the punishment for the offence has
been varied between the time of commission and the time of sentencing, to the
benefit of the lesser punishment. 
12. Everyone has the right not to be subjected
to any cruel and unusual treatment or punishment. 
13. A witness who testifies
in any proceedings has the right not to have any incriminating evidence so
given used to incriminate that witness in any other proceedings, except in a
prosecution for perjury or for the giving of contradictory evidence. 
14. A party
or witness in any proceedings who does not understand or speak the language
in which the proceedings are conducted or who is deaf has the right to the
assistance of an interpreter.

Equality Rights

15.(1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and
has the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without
discrimination and, in particular, without discrimination based on race,
national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical
disability. (2) Subsection (1) does not preclude any law, program or activity
that has as its object the amelioration of conditions of disadvantaged
individuals or groups including those that are disadvantaged because of race,
national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical
disability.

Official Languages of Canada

16.(1) English and French are the official languages of Canada and
have equality of status and equal rights and privileges as to their use in all
institutions of the Parliament and government of Canada. (2) English and
French are the official languages of New Brunswick and have equality of
status and equal rights and privileges as to their use in all institutions of the
legislature and government of New Brunswick. (3) Nothing in this Charter
limits the authority of Parliament or a legislature to advance the equality of
status or use of English and French. 16.1(1) The English linguistic community
and the French linguistic community in New Brunswick have equality of status
and equal rights and privileges, including the right to distinct educational
institutions and such distinct cultural institutions as are necessary for
the preservation and promotion of those communities. (2) The role of the
legislature and government of New Brunswick to preserve and promote the
status, rights and privileges referred to in subsection (1) is affirmed. 
17.(1) Everyone has the right to use English or French in any debates and other
proceedings of Parliament. (2) Everyone has the right to use English or French
in any debates and other proceedings of the legislature of New Brunswick.
18. (1) The statutes, records and journals of Parliament shall be printed and
published in English and French and both language versions are equally authoritative. 
(2) The statutes, records and journals of the legislature of New Brunswick
shall be printed and published in English and French and both
language versions are equally authoritative.
19.(1) Either English or French may be used by any person
in, or in any pleading in or process issuing from, any court established by
Parliament. (2) Either English or French may be used by any person in, or in
any pleading in or process issuing from, any court of New Brunswick. 
20.(1) Any member of the public in Canada has the right to communicate with, and
to receive available services from, any head or central office of an institution
of the Parliament or government of Canada in English or French, and has the
same right with respect to any other office of any such institution where (a)
there is a significant demand for communications with and services from that
office in such language; or (b) due to the nature of the office, it is reasonable
that communications with and services from that office be available in both
English and French. (2) Any member of the public in New Brunswick has the
right to communicate with, and to receive available services from, any office
of an institution of the legislature or government of New Brunswick in English
or French. 
21. Nothing in sections 16 to 20 abrogates or derogates from any
right, privilege or obligation with respect to the English and French languages,
or either of them, that exists or is continued by virtue of any other provision
of the Constitution of Canada.
22. Nothing in sections 16 to 20 abrogates or
derogates from any legal or customary right or privilege acquired or enjoyed
either before or after the coming into force of this Charter with respect to any
language that is not English or French. 

Minority Language Educational Rights

23.(1) Citizens of Canada (a) whose first language learned and still
understood is that of the English or French linguistic minority population
of the province in which they reside, or (b) who have received their primary
school instruction in Canada in English or French and reside in a province
where the language in which they received that instruction is the language of
the English or French linguistic minority population of the province, have the
right to have their children receive primary and secondary school instruction
in that language in that province. (2) Citizens of Canada of whom any child
has received or is receiving primary or secondary school instruction in English
or French in Canada, have the right to have all their children receive primary
and secondary school instruction in the same language. (3) The right of
citizens of Canada under subsections (1) and (2) to have their children receive
primary and secondary school instruction in the language of the English
or French linguistic minority population of a province (a) applies wherever
in the province the number of children of citizens who have such a right is
sufficient to warrant the provision to them out of public funds of minority
language instruction; and (b) includes, where the number of those children so 
warrants, the right to have them receive that instruction in minority language
educational facilities provided out of public funds.

Enforcement

24.(1) Anyone whose rights or freedoms, as guaranteed by this
Charter, have been infringed or denied may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction to obtain such remedy as the court considers appropriate and just
in the circumstances. (2) Where, in proceedings under subsection (1),a court
concludes that evidence was obtained in a manner that infringed or denied any
rights or freedoms guaranteed by this Charter, the evidence shall be excluded if
it is established that, having regard to all the circumstances, the admission of it
in the proceedings would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.

General

25. The guarantee in this Charter of certain rights and freedoms
shall not be construed so as to abrogate or derogate from any aboriginal,
treaty or other rights or freedoms that pertain to the aboriginal peoples of
Canada including (a) any rights or freedoms that have been recognized by
the Royal Proclamation of October 7, 1763; and (b) any rights or freedoms
that now exist by way of land claims agreements or may be so acquired. 
26. The guarantee in this Charter of certain rights and freedoms shall not be
construed as denying the existence of any other rights or freedoms that exist in
Canada. 
27. This Charter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the
preservation and enhancement of the multicultural heritage of Canadians. 
28. Notwithstanding anything in this Charter, the rights and freedoms referred to
in it are guaranteed equally to male and female persons. 
29. Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by
or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational, separate
or dissentient schools. 
30. A reference in this Charter to a province or to the legislative assembly 
or legislature of a province shall be deemed to include a reference to the 
Yukon Territory and the Northwest Territories, or to the appropriate legislative 
authority thereof, as the case may be. 
31. Nothing in this Charter extends the legislative powers of any body or authority.

Application of Charter

32.(1) This Charter applies (a) to the Parliament and government of
Canada in respect of all matters within the authority of Parliament including
all matters relating to the Yukon Territory and Northwest Territories; and (b)
to the legislature and government of each province in respect of all matters
within the authority of the legislature of each province. (2) Notwithstanding
subsection (1), section 15 shall not have effect until three years after this
section comes into force. 33.(1) Parliament or the legislature of a province
may expressly declare in an Act of Parliament or of the legislature, as the case
may be, that the Act or a provision thereof shall operate notwithstanding a
provision included in section 2 or sections 7 to 15 of this Charter. (2) An Act or
a provision of an Act in respect of which a declaration made under this section
is in effect shall have such operation as it would have but for the provision
of this Charter referred to in the declaration. (3) A declaration made under
subsection (1) shall cease to have effect five years after it comes into force or
on such earlier date as may be specified in the declaration.(4) Parliament or
the legislature of a province may re-enact a declaration made under subsection
(1).(5) Subsection (3) applies in respect of a re-enactment made under
subsection (4).


Canadian Bill of Rights
S.C. 1960, c. 44

Assented to 1960-08-10

An Act for the Recognition and Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

Preamble
The Parliament of Canada, affirming that the Canadian Nation is founded upon principles that acknowledge the supremacy of God, the dignity and worth of the human person and the position of the family in a society of free men and free institutions;

Affirming also that men and institutions remain free only when freedom is founded upon respect for moral and spiritual values and the rule of law;

And being desirous of enshrining these principles and the human rights and fundamental freedoms derived from them, in a Bill of Rights which shall reflect the respect of Parliament for its constitutional authority and which shall ensure the protection of these rights and freedoms in Canada:

Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada, enacts as follows:

PART I
Bill of Rights
Marginal note:Recognition and declaration of rights and freedoms

1 It is hereby recognized and declared that in Canada there have existed and shall continue to exist without discrimination by reason of race, national origin, colour, religion or sex, the following human rights and fundamental freedoms, namely,

(a) the right of the individual to life, liberty, security of the person and enjoyment of property, and the right not to be deprived thereof except by due process of law;

(b) the right of the individual to equality before the law and the protection of the law;

(c) freedom of religion;

(d) freedom of speech;

(e) freedom of assembly and association; and

(f) freedom of the press.

Marginal note:Construction of law

2 Every law of Canada shall, unless it is expressly declared by an Act of the Parliament of Canada that it shall operate notwithstanding the Canadian Bill of Rights, be so construed and applied as not to abrogate, abridge or infringe or to authorize the abrogation, abridgment or infringement of any of the rights or freedoms herein recognized and declared, and in particular, no law of Canada shall be construed or applied so as to

(a) authorize or effect the arbitrary detention, imprisonment or exile of any person;

(b) impose or authorize the imposition of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment;

(c) deprive a person who has been arrested or detained

(i) of the right to be informed promptly of the reason for his arrest or detention,

(ii) of the right to retain and instruct counsel without delay, or

(iii) of the remedy by way of habeas corpus for the determination of the validity of his detention and for his release if the detention is not lawful;

(d) authorize a court, tribunal, commission, board or other authority to compel a person to give evidence if he is denied counsel, protection against self crimination or other constitutional safeguards;

(e) deprive a person of the right to a fair hearing in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice for the determination of his rights and obligations;

(f) deprive a person charged with a criminal offence of the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, or of the right to reasonable bail without just cause; or

(g) deprive a person of the right to the assistance of an interpreter in any proceedings in which he is involved or in which he is a party or a witness, before a court, commission, board or other tribunal, if he does not understand or speak the language in which such proceedings are conducted.

Marginal note:Duties of Minister of Justice

3 (1) Subject to subsection (2), the Minister of Justice shall, in accordance with such regulations as may be prescribed by the Governor in Council, examine every regulation transmitted to the Clerk of the Privy Council for registration pursuant to the Statutory Instruments Act and every Bill introduced in or presented to the House of Commons by a Minister of the Crown, in order to ascertain whether any of the provisions thereof are inconsistent with the purposes and provisions of this Part and he shall report any such inconsistency to the House of Commons at the first convenient opportunity.

Marginal note:Exception

(2) A regulation need not be examined in accordance with subsection (1) if prior to being made it was examined as a proposed regulation in accordance with section 3 of the Statutory Instruments Act to ensure that it was not inconsistent with the purposes and provisions of this Part.

1960, c. 44, s. 31970-71-72, c. 38, s. 291985, c. 26, s. 1051992, c. 1, s. 144(F)
Marginal note:Short title

4 The provisions of this Part shall be known as the Canadian Bill of Rights.

Part II
Marginal note:Savings

5 (1) Nothing in Part I shall be construed to abrogate or abridge any human right or fundamental freedom not enumerated therein that may have existed in Canada at the commencement of this Act.

Marginal note:"Law of Canada" defined

(2) The expression "law of Canada" in Part I means an Act of the Parliament of Canada enacted before or after the coming into force of this Act, any order, rule or regulation thereunder, and any law in force in Canada or in any part of Canada at the commencement of this Act that is subject to be repealed, abolished or altered by the Parliament of Canada.

Marginal note:Jurisdiction of Parliament

(3) The provisions of Part I shall be construed as extending only to matters coming within the legislative authority of the Parliament of Canada.